MBIS4006 Information Systems Security @ Australian Institute of Higher Education, Sydney 
Lab 2 
Aim: Use the Nessus tool to scan the network for vulnerabilities. 
Objectives: Objective of the module is scan system and network analysis. 
Outcomes: The learner will be able to: 
• Identify network vulnerability with tool 
• Use current techniques, skills, and tools to find out different vulnerabilities and the 
countermeasures for identified vulnerabilities. 
Hardware / Software Required: Nessus Vulnerability Scanner | Tenable Network Security 
tool 
Theory: 
Nessus is a proprietary comprehensive vulnerability scanner which is developed by Tenable 
Network Security. It is free of charge for personal use in a non-enterprise environment. 
Operation 
• Nessus allows scans for the following types of vulnerabilities. 
• Vulnerabilities that allow a remote hacker to control or access sensitive data on a 
system. 
• Misconfiguration (e.g. open mail relay, missing patches, etc.). 
Default passwords, a few common passwords, and blank/absent passwords on some system 
accounts. Nessus can also call Hydra (an external tool) to launch a dictionary attack. Denials 
of service against the TCP/IP stack by using malformed packets. 
Preparation for PCI DSS audits 
On UNIX (including Mac OS X), it consists of nessusd, the Nessus daemon, which does the 
scanning, and nessus, the client, which controls scans and presents the vulnerability results to 
the user. In typical operation, Nessus begins by doing a port scan with one of its four internal 
port scanners (or it can optionally use AmapM or Nmap) to determine which ports are open 
on the target and then tries various exploits on the open ports. The vulnerability tests, 
available as subscriptions, are written in NASL (Nessus Attack Scripting Language), a 
scripting language optimized for custom network interaction. Tenable Network Security 
produces several dozen new vulnerability checks (called plugins) each week, usually on a 
daily basis. These checks are available for free to the general public; commercial customers 
are not allowed to use this Home Feed any more. The Professional Feed (which is not free) 
also give access to support and additional scripts (e.g. audit files, compliance tests, additional 
vulnerability detection plugins). Optionally, the results of the scan can be reported in various 
MBIS4006 Information Systems Security @ Australian Institute of Higher Education, Sydney 
formats, such as plain text, XML, HTML and LaTeX. The results can also be saved in a 
knowledge base for debugging. On UNIX, scanning can be automated through the use of a 
command-line client. There exist many different commercial, free and open source tools for 
both UNIX and Windows to manage individual or distributed Nessus scanners. If the user 
chooses to do so (by disabling the option 'safe checks'), some of Nessus' vulnerability test 
may try to cause vulnerable services or operating systems to crash. This lets a user test the 
resistance of a device before putting it in production. Nessus provides additional functionality 
beyond testing for known network vulnerabilities. For instance, it can use Windows 
credentials to examine patch levels on computers running the Windows operating system, and 
can perform password auditing using dictionary and brute force methods. Nessus 3 and later 
can also audit systems to make sure they have been configured per a specific policy, such as 
the NSA's guide for hardening Windows servers. 
Basic Network scanning: 
MBIS4006 Information Systems Security @ Australian Institute of Higher Education, Sydney 
Advanced scanning in general search: 
Ntstat port scanning: 
MBIS4006 Information Systems Security @ Australian Institute of Higher Education, Sydney 
Vulnerability Mapping: 
MBIS4006 Information Systems Security @ Australian Institute of Higher Education, Sydney 
 
Policies: 
 
 
 
Plugins: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MBIS4006 Information Systems Security @ Australian Institute of Higher Education, Sydney 
 
General Scanning: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MBIS4006 Information Systems Security @ Australian Institute of Higher Education, Sydney 
Port Scanning: 
Conclusion: 
Running a security scanner against your systems is a very important part of the job. It is a 
system administrator or security officer’s job to keep their systems secure and the data 
contained in them safe. Hackers have access to all the same information and tools that the rest 
of us do. Hackers run the very same tools and it is advantageous to know what the results are 
that they see if they scan your system. They find time to do the research, so we must also. 
Nessus provides a lot of functionality in one tool. It utilizes Nmap, easy to update plug-ins, and 
nice reporting tools for upper management. It is has repeatedly scored high on comparisons 
between scanners including commercial scanners that come with a hefty price tag. And of 
course as budgets tighten, remember Nessus is a free tool. The only cost is the users time in 
learning it and using it, but that is a cost associated with all tools. And luckily Nessus is an 
easy to learn tool. Using this tool and seeing the vulnerabilities will help you gain knowledge 
of your systems and help teach you how to protect them. 
MBIS4006 Information Systems Security @ Australian Institute of Higher Education, Sydney 
Questions: 
Submit the screenshots of your lab and the answers to the below questions in a document file 
(.doc/.pdf) 
1. What’s the current version of Nessus? 
2. What OS platforms does Nessus have builds for?
 3. What are the system/hardware requirements for using Nessus?
 4. What is the heart of the nessus?
 5. When using the Nessus user interface, which of browsers are supported? 
